This leads us to the topic of scaling,
or standardizing the data.
Scaling of the data is
an important consideration
when getting your data ready for
a clustering process.
Since the distance concept is important
to determining clusters, the relative
size of the values between the variables
used becomes important as well.
As an example, assume we have
two variables we're using for
a cluster analysis.
One is a percentage with
a range of 0%- 100%.
Say of a demographic,
like a percentage of a given ethnicity.
The other variable is a measure of some
sort of absolute data, say, population.
Which can go from 0 to any maximum,
but may range into the millions.
Using these two variables without any
adjustment will give a much higher
weight to the population variable
than the percentage variable.
Because clustering solutions are very
sensitive to this kind of difference in
scale, many algorithms provide for
automatically standardizing
the variables to similar scales.
One common method is calculating
the Z-score of each value in the field.
This is also called the standard score.
It basically measures the number
of standard deviations each value
is from the mean.
Another scaling method is to
calculate the unit interval,
which compresses all values
in a field to a 0 to 1 range.
A common method for
this would be to shift the variables so
that the minimum value is 0.
So in a case where the minimum
of the original variable is 10,
you would subtract 10
from each variable.
Then you would divide each row
in this field by the maximum
of the previous result.
So for our example of using
a percentage of ethnicity and
an absolute population number, when you
use either of these scaling methods,
the resulting values
can end up being used
without overweighting the analysis
with the larger population number.
So this eliminates
the bias in the algorithm
towards that bigger population number.